# Rapper Analytics
Analysis of Rap Artists' Top Songs and Genius PageViews

I began this project to investigate whether the Pareto Principle (AKA Power Law, 80/20 Principle, etc.) was present in the music streams of hip-hop/rap artists. I thought that bigger artists, such as Drake, Kanye West, and Jay-Z would be the least likely to have this law hold true. Since they have die-hard fans, consistently praised albums, and multiple chart-topping hits, the odds are slim that the value of 1/5th of their songs equate to the bottom 4/5ths. 

I wanted to see if popularity played a role in this relationship. It's much easier for a less established artist to have one song 'blow up' and become their main source of popularity. It's more difficult for a medium to upper tier artist to have a few songs that overtake the rest of their discography.

I was not able to locate the exact number of streams per song through the Spotify API. If anyone can find this, please let me know. As far as I found out, this streaming number is shrouded behind the 'popularity' rating for each song in some Spotify algorithm (which I would love to learn more about as well). As an alternative, I decided to use the number of page views that each song had on Genius. I was able to access this data through the Genius API, which has some great information on lyrics that I plan on looking into more in the future. One problem with this measure is that it will overstate the popularity of lyrical rappers, such as Kendrick Lamar or Eminem, and songs with highly quotable lines, which Drake is known for. Quotable songs often experience network effects because they have "that one line" that everyone knows, and people like to know these songs and play them with others. Therefore, streams will go up to compensate for the pageviews more than lyrical songs, which, honestly, are probably significantly less popular than songs with great quotes. They are just harder to consume. 

I wish that there were more analytics widely available about music, but I'm sure they exist in some database somewhere. For example, the changes over time for certain songs and their pageviews. I would love to investigate old songs blowing up on TikTok or other social media and seeing how big of a jump they have in their popularity. Music labels must be nudging their artists into these catchy snippets of music to up their music streams, or artists might even plant songs to make TikTok do exactly what they want (see: Toosie Slide by Drake).

This project served as a benchmark for future insight as I was just getting acclimated to these data resources. I hope to look further into top lyrics of these artists as well using the Genius API. I also have song characteristics courtesy of Spotify, and I've already seen loose correlations (max 0.25) that relate these variables with increased pageviews (danceability). 
