# RapperAnalytics
Analysis of Rap Artists' Songs and Genius PageViews

I began this project to investigate whether the Pareto Principle (AKA Power Law, 80/20 Principle, etc.) was present in the music streams of hip-hop/rap artists. I thought that bigger artists, such as Drake, Kanye West, and Jay-Z would be the least likely to have this law hold true. Since they have die-hard fans, consistently praised albums, and multiple chart-topping hits, the odds that they have 1/5th of songs that equate to the bottom 4/5ths is slim to none. 

Therefore, I wanted to see if popularity played a role in this relationship. It's much easier for a less established artist to have one song 'blow up' and become their main source of popularity. It's more difficult for a medium to upper tier artist to have a few songs that overtake the rest of their discography. I hope to find out more when looking through the data, since there can be a few 

A few notes on data:

I was not able to locate the exact number of streams per song through the Spotify API. If anyone can find this, please let me know. As far as I found out, this streaming number is shrouded behind the 'popularity' rating for each song in some Spotify algorithm (which I would love to learn more about as well!). As an alternative, I decided to use the number of pageviews that each song had on Genius. I was able to access this data through the Genius API, which has some great information on lyrics that I plan on looking into more in the future. One problem with this measure is that it will overstate the popularity of lyrical rappers, such as Kendrick Lamar or Eminem, and songs with quotables, which Drake is known for. The former is more important than the latter, as people are more likely to look up Genius lyrics for quotables, but casual fans will likely not do this. These songs often experience network effects because they have "that one line" that everyone knows, and people like to know these songs and play them with others. Therefore, streams will go up to compensate for the pageviews more than lyrical songs, which, honestly, are probably significantly less popular than songs with great quotes. 

In addition to pageviews, I will take the average of the popularity ratings from Spotify. I have a suspicion that the Spotify algorithm uses 'hype' as a factor, and this will give extreme recency bias to music. For example, a popular Drake song from the past 2 months will be much higher than an equally popular Drake song from 2013. This is not helpful from an analysis perspective, since these songs should be closer in popularity than they may be in the rating. We could also argue forever about how longevity of the song may be more important than current hype - AKA 'staying power' of an artist or their music - but that's another conversation.

A massive issue between popularity and pageviews is that pageviews will depend largely on the artist, and not the production behind the song. There are many songs that rely heavily on the production (the beat, the drums, the sample, etc.) and NOT on the lyrics alone. Catchy songs with good Instagram captions are more popular than songs that are beautifully arranged with triple entendres and deep refererences. Keep this in mind, since producers are essential to the experience of a song.

I wish that there were more analytics widely available about music, but I'm sure they exist in some form in some database somewhere. For example, the changes over time for certain songs and their pageviews. I would love to investigate old songs blowing up on TikTok or other social media and seeing how big of a jump they have in their popularity. Music labels must be nudging their artists into these catchy snippets of music to up their music streams, or artists might even PLANT songs to make TikTok do exactly what they want (see: Toosie Slide by Drake). I apologize for mentioning Drake often, but we're talking about popularity, lyrics, and the population at large here. He runs the game.
